+++
title = "advice for u/Eggstasy on r/academia related with carrer planning"
date = 2023-04-24
summary = "iwantadvice"
[taxonomies]
tags = ["academia"]
categories = ["research"]
+++

https://www.reddit.com/r/academia/comments/12ru59v/badly_need_advice_on_career_planning/

<!— more —>

u/Eggstasy - OP

I am currently finishing my undergrad in physics (in Germany, to add some
context). I am currently 19, and writing my thesis in the area of mathematical
physics. At risk of tooting my own horn, my advisor has been saying that the
thesis is progressing quite fast, and if I keep the work up, it could be
published in a journal.

It has been my dream to start a career in academia, and I feel like this is the
first step towards that. The thing is, I have been quite discouraged by the many
voices online talking about how difficult getting positions is, about how tenure
is a pipe dream, and so on.

So, in short, I was wondering if I am on a good track if I start publishing
early, and finish my masters and phd at a young age. Does age play an important
role for academic careers?

I also wanted to ask what I can do to maximize the chances of finding good
positions later on. I am starting to have more contact with actual researchers
now that I am working on my thesis, how can I make a good impression and make
contacts for the future? Is there anything that I can do to improve my odds of a
successful career?

u/NMJD
---

Getting on the academic track early and being young when you graduate is not in
and of itself an advantage on the job market, it depends on what you've done
with your time.

I've known students who were really bright and had lots of early opportunities
that helped them progress quickly through school. I've known students who were
very bright but got their undergraduate degree and then worked in industry for a
few years before returning to school for their PhD. I've known students who were
very bright but contributed to their home families in ways that delayed them
starting school for a few years. The age played honestly less of a factor than
the question of: "do you have the skills to manage your life and spend a long
time on something even after it becomes uninteresting?" -- because this kicks in
in graduate school in a way that's not as represented in undergrad.

For some students they are much better at that after they have had a
non-academic job, other students can do it even without that.

Regarding if the academic job market is worth it: that isn't actually a decision
you have to make right now. Your career plans can change while you're getting
your masters and PhD.

I'd say, if you're interested in the work and want to continue doing it, go get
your masters and PhD. If it's possible to work your undergrad thesis up into a
publication, definitely do that. Then while you're in school, be sure to focus
on your research (get your work published, go to conferences, etc) but also be
sure to watch and ask questions of people in jobs you're interested in. How
happy do profs look? Why did they become professors? What surprised them about
being a professor? What do they spend most of their time on?

The academic job market in the US is tough, that's all I can speak to. I have
family in Germany so I know about academic differences there, but am not sure
about the job market. For me, based on what I like doing, the academic job
market was still worth it. If it is or isn't worth it to you will likely be a
little more clear during and after grad school. If, during grad school, you
decide you don't want to stay in academia, there are many other things you can
do with a physics PhD.

u/neazwaflcasd
---

One step at a time. I mentored many undergraduate and graduate students as a
postdoc. They all thought of academia as some sort of Shangri-La. Only ~10% of
them went on to academic careers. All others found positions they were happier
with in industry, got burned out by the grind of grad school, or completely
changed course for a variety of reasons (family, children, etc.). In fact, one
of them has a story that is nearly identical to yours (not sure if yours will
end the same way, but here's an example). She told me "she was destined to
become a professor" as an undergrad in an honors program. I recommend she slow
down and wait to see what the future holds. After 1 year of her doctoral program
she dropped out, got married, became a high school teacher, and started a family
(3 kids now). She's happy, that's all that matters. Again, take it one step at a
time. You never know where life will take you! Enjoy the ride.
